  Is there anything whereof it may be said,
   See, this is new!
  It hath been already of old time,
   Which was before us.
  There is no remembrance of former things;
   Neither shall there be any remembrance
  Of things that are to come
   With those that shall come after.

'_No word that hath here been set
down shall cease out of the land for ever_.' 

_Those that built them tombs_, he sang, _have now no resting-place.
Lo! what of their deeds?  I have heard the words of Yemhotep and of
Hardedef, whose sayings men repeat continually.  Behold! where are
their abodes?  Their walls are over-thrown, and their places are not,
even as though they had not been._'

A.  The Governor of his City, the Vizier, Ptah-hotep, he said: 'O
Prince, my Lord, the end of life is at hand; old age descendeth upon
me; feebleness cometh, and childishness is renewed.  He that is old
lieth down in misery every day.  The eyes are small; the ears are deaf.
Energy is diminished, the heart hath no rest.  The mouth is silent, and
he speaketh no word; the heart stoppeth, and he remembereth not
yesterday.  The bones are painful throughout the body; good turneth
unto evil.  All taste departeth.  These things doeth old age for
mankind, being evil in all things.  The nose is stopped, and he
breatheth not for weakness, whether standing or sitting.

'Command me, thy servant, therefore, to make over my princely authority to my son.  Let me speak unto him the words of them that hearken to
the counsel of the men of old time; those that  hearkened unto the
gods.  I pray thee, let this thing be done, that sin may be banished
from among persons of understanding, that thou may enlighten the lands.'

Said the Majesty of this God:[1] 'Instruct him, then, in the words of
old time; may he be a wonder unto the children of princes, that they
may enter and hearken with him.  Make straight all their hearts; and
discourse with him, without causing weariness.'


1.  Be not proud because thou art learned; but discourse with the
ignorant man, as with the sage.  For no limit can be set to skill,
neither is there any craftsman that possesseth full advantages.  Fair
speech is more rare than the emerald that is found by slave-maidens on
the pebbles.

2.  If thou find an arguer talking, one that is well disposed and wiser
than thou, let thine arms {43} fall, bend thy back,[3] be not angry
with him if he agree  not with thee.  Refrain from speaking evilly;
oppose him not at any time when he speaketh.  If he address thee as one
ignorant of the matter, thine humbleness shall bear away his
contentions.

3.  If thou find an arguer talking, thy fellow, one that is within thy
reach, keep not silence when he saith aught that is evil; so shalt thou
be wiser than he.  Great will be the applause on the part of the
listeners, and thy name shall be good in the knowledge of princes.

4.  If thou find an arguer talking, a poor man, that is to say not
thine equal, be not scornful toward him because he is lowly.  Let him
alone; then shall he confound himself.  Question him not to please
thine heart, neither pour out thy wrath upon him that is before thee;
it is shameful to confuse a mean mind.  If thou be about to do that
which is in thine heart, overcome it as a thing rejected of princes.

5.  If thou be a leader, as one directing the conduct of the multitude,
endeavour always to be gracious, that thine own conduct be without
defect.  Great is Truth, appointing a straight path; never hath it been
overthrown since the {44} reign of Osiris.[4]  One that oversteppeth
the laws shall be punished.  Overstepping is by the covetous man; but
degradations  bear off his riches, for the season of his evil-doing
ceaseth not.  For he saith, 'I will obtain by myself for myself,' and
saith not, 'I will obtain because I am allowed.'  But the limits of
justice are steadfast; it is that which a man repeateth from his father.

6.  Cause not fear among men; for [this] the God punisheth likewise.
For there is a man that saith, 'Therein is life'; and he is bereft of
the bread of his mouth.  There is a man that saith, 'Power [is
therein]'; and he saith, 'I seize for myself that which I perceive.'
Thus a man speaketh, and he is smitten down.  It is another that
attaineth by giving unto him that hath not; not he that causeth men
dread.  For it happeneth that what the God hath commanded, even that
thing cometh to pass.  Live, therefore, in the house of kindliness, and
men shall come and give gifts of themselves.

7.  If thou be among the guests of a man that is greater than thou,
accept that which he giveth thee, putting it to thy lips.  If thou look
at him that is before thee (thine host), pierce him not {45} with many
glances.  It is abhorred of the soul[5] to stare at him.  Speak not
till he address thee; one knoweth not what may be evil in his opinion.
Speak when he questioneth thee; so shall thy speech be good in his
opinion.  The noble who sitteth before food divideth it as his soul
moveth him; he giveth unto him that he would favour--it is the custom
of the evening meal.  It is his soul that guideth his hand.  It is the
noble that bestoweth, not the underling that attaineth.  Thus the
eating of bread is under the providence of the God; he is an ignorant
man that disputeth it.

8.  If thou be an emissary sent from one noble to another, be exact
after the manner of him that sent thee, give his message even as he
hath said it.  Beware of making enmity by thy words, setting one noble
against the other by perverting truth.  Overstep it not, neither repeat
that which any man, be he prince or peasant, saith in opening the
heart; it is abhorrent to the soul.

9.  If thou have ploughed, gather thine harvest in the field, and the
God shall make it great under thine hand.  Fill not thy mouth at thy
neighbours' table....[6]  If a crafty man be the {46} possessor of
wealth, he stealeth like a crocodile from the priests.

Let not a man be envious that hath no children; let him be neither
downcast nor quarrelsome on account of it.  For a father, though great,
may be grieved; as to the mother of children, she hath less peace than
another.  Verily, each man is created [to his destiny] by the God, Who
is the chief of a tribe, trustful in following him.

10.  If thou be lowly, serve a wise man, that all thine actions may be
good before the God.  If thou have known a man of none account that
hath been advanced in rank, be not haughty toward him on account of
that which thou knowest concerning him; but honour him that hath been
advanced, according to that which he hath become.

Behold, riches come not of themselves; it is their rule for him that
desireth them.  If he bestir him and collect them himself, the God
shall make him prosperous; but He shall punish him, if he be slothful.

11.  Follow thine heart during thy lifetime; do not more than is
commanded thee.  Diminish not the time of following the heart; it is
abhorred of the soul, that its time [of ease] be taken away.  Shorten
not the daytime more than is needful to {47} maintain thine house.
When riches are gained, follow the heart; for riches are of no avail if
one be weary.

12.  If thou wouldest be a wise man, beget a son for the pleasing of
the God.  If he make straight his course after thine example, if he
arrange thine affairs in due order, do unto him all that is good, for
thy son is he, begotten of thine own soul.  Sunder not thine heart from
him, or thine own begotten shall curse [thee].  If he be heedless and
trespass thy rules of conduct, and is violent; if every speech that
cometh from his mouth be a vile word; then beat thou him, that his talk
may be fitting.  Keep him from those that make light of that which is
commanded, for it is they that make him rebellious.[7]  And they that
are guided go not astray, but they that lose their bearings cannot find
a straight course.

13.  If thou be in the chamber of council, act always according to the
steps enjoined on thee at the beginning of the day.  Be not absent, or
thou shall be expelled; but be ready in entering and making report.
Wide[8] is the seat of one that hath made address.  The council-chamber
acteth by strict rule; and all its plans are in accordance with method.
It is the God that advanceth one to a seat therein; the like is
not done for elbowers.

14.  If thou be among people, make for thyself love, the beginning and
end of the heart.  One that knoweth not his course shall say in himself
(seeing thee), 'He that ordereth himself duly becometh the owner of
wealth; I shall copy his conduct.'  Thy name shall be good, though thou
speak not; thy body shall be fed; thy face shall be [seen] among thy
neighbours; thou shalt be provided with what thou lackest.  As to the
man whose heart obeyeth his belly, he causeth disgust in place of love.
His heart is wretched, his body is gross, he is insolent toward
those endowed of the God.  He that obeyeth his belly hath an enemy.[9]

Report thine actions without concealment; discover thy conduct
when in council with thine overlord.  It is not evil for the envoy that
his report be not answered, 'Yea, I know it,' by the prince; for that
which he knoweth includeth not this.  If he (the prince) think that
he will oppose him on account of it, he thinketh 'He will be silent
because I have spoken.'

If thou be a leader, cause that the rules  that thou hast
enjoined be carried out; and do all things as one that remembereth the
days coming after, when speech availeth not.  Be not lavish of favours;
it leadeth to servility, producing slackness.

If thou be a leader, be gracious when thou hearkenest unto the
speech of a suppliant.  Let him not hesitate to deliver himself of that
which he hath thought to tell thee; but be desirous of removing his
injury.  Let him speak freely, that the thing for which he hath come to
thee may be done.  If he hesitate to open his heart, it is said, 'Is it
because he, the judge, doeth the wrong that no entreaties are made to
him concerning it by those to whom it happeneth?' But a well-taught
heart hearkeneth readily.

If thou desire to continue friendship in any abode wherein thou
enterest, be it as master, as brother, or as friend; wheresoever thou
goest, beware of consorting with women.  No place prospereth wherein
that is done.  Nor is it prudent to take part in it; a thousand men
have been ruined for the pleasure of a little time short as a dream.
Even death is reached thereby; it is a wretched thing.  As for the evil
liver, one leaveth him for what he doeth, he is avoided.  If his
desires be not gratified, he regardeth  no laws.

If thou desire that thine actions may be good, save thyself from
all malice, and beware of the quality of covetousness, which is a
grievous inner  malady.  Let it not chance that thou fall thereinto.
It setteth at variance fathers-in-law and the kinsmen of the
daughter-in-law; it sundereth the wife and the husband.  It gathereth
unto itself all evils; it is the girdle of all wickedness.[11]  But the
man that is just flourisheth; truth goeth in his footsteps, and he
maketh habitations therein, not in the dwelling of covetousness.

Be not covetous as touching shares, in seizing that which is not
thine own property.  Be not covetous toward thy neighbours; for with a
gentle man praise availeth more than might.  He that is covetous
cometh empty from among his neighbours, being void of the persuasion of
speech.  One hath remorse for even a little covetousness when his belly
cooleth.

If thou wouldest be wise, provide for thine house, and love thy
wife that is in thine arms.  Fill her stomach, clothe her back; oil is
the remedy of her limbs.  Gladden her heart during thy lifetime, for
she is an estate profitable unto its lord.  Be not harsh, for
gentleness mastereth her more than strength.  Give  to her that for
which she sigheth and that toward which her eye looketh; so shalt
thou keep her in thine house....

Satisfy thine hired servants out of such things as thou hast; it
is the duty of one that hath been favoured of the God.  In sooth, it is
hard to satisfy hired servants.  For one saith, 'He is a lavish
person; one knoweth not that which may come from him].'  But on the
morrow he thinketh, 'He is a person of exactitude (parsimony), content
therein.'  And when favours have been shown unto servants, they say,
'We go.'  Peace dwelleth not in that town wherein dwell servants that
are wretched.

23.  Repeat not extravagant speech, neither listen thereto; for it is
the utterance of a body heated by wrath.  When such speech is repeated
to thee, hearken not thereto, look to the ground.  Speak not regarding
it, that he that is before thee may know wisdom.  If thou be commanded
to do a theft, bring it to pass that the command be taken off thee, for
it is a thing hateful according to law.  That which destroyeth a vision
is the veil over it.

24.  If thou wouldest be a wise man, and one sitting in council with
his overlord, apply thine heart unto perfection.  Silence is more
profitable unto thee than abundance of speech.  Consider how thou
may be opposed by an expert that speaketh in council.  It is a foolish
thing to speak on every kind of work, for he that disputeth thy words
shall put them unto proof.

25.  If thou be powerful, make thyself to be honoured for knowledge and
for gentleness.  Speak with authority, that is, not as if following
injunctions, for he that is humble (when highly placed) falleth into
errors.  Exalt not thine heart, that it be not brought low. Be not
silent, but beware of interruption and of answering words with heat.
Put it far from thee; control thyself.   The wrathful heart speaketh
fiery words; it darteth out at the man of peace that approacheth,
stopping his path.

One that reckoneth accounts all the day passeth not an happy moment.
One that gladdeneth his heart all the day provideth not for his house.
The bowman hitteth the mark, as the steersman reacheth land, by
diversity of aim.  He that obeyeth his heart shall command.

26.  Let not a prince be hindered when he is occupied; neither oppress
the heart of him that is already laden.  For he shall be hostile toward
one that delayeth him, but shall bare his soul {53} unto one that
loveth him.  The disposal of souls is with the God, and that which He
loveth is His creation.  Set out, therefore, after a violent quarrel;
be at peace with him that is hostile unto thee his opponent.  It is
such souls that make love to grow.

Instruct a noble in such things as be profitable unto him; cause
that he be received among men.  Let his satisfaction fall on his
master, for thy provision dependeth upon his will.  By reason of it thy
belly shall be satisfied; thy back will be clothed thereby.  Let him
receive thine heart, that thine house may flourish and thine honour--if
thou wish it to flourish--thereby.  He shall extend thee a kindly hand.
Further, he shall implant the love of thee in the bodies of thy
friends.  Forsooth, it is a soul loving to hearken.

If thou be the son of a man of the priesthood, and an envoy to
conciliate the multitude, speak thou without favouring one
side.  Let it not be said, 'His conduct is that of the nobles,
favouring one side in his speech.'  Turn thine aim toward exact
judgments.

If thou have been gracious at a former time, having forgiven a man
to guide him aright, shun him, remind him not after the first day that
he hath been silent to thee concerning it.

If thou be great, after being of none account, and hast gotten
riches after squalor, being foremost in these in the city, and hast
knowledge concerning useful matters, so that promotion is come unto
thee; then swathe not thine heart in thine hoard, for thou art become
the steward of the endowments of the God.  Thou art not the last;
another shall be thine equal, and to him shall come the like fortune
and station.

Bend thy back unto thy chief, thine overseer in the King's palace,
for thine house dependeth upon his wealth, and thy wages in their
season.  How foolish is one that quarrelleth with his chief, for one
liveth only while he is gracious....

Plunder not the houses of tenants; neither steal the things of a
friend, lest he accuse thee in thine hearing, which thrusteth back the
heart. If he know of it, he will do thee an injury.  Quarrelling
in place of friendship is a foolish thing.

If thou wouldest seek out the nature of a friend, ask it not of
any companion of his; but pass a time with him alone, that thou injure
not his affairs.  Debate with him after a season; test his heart in an
occasion of speech.  When he hath told thee his past life, he hath made
an opportunity that thou may either be ashamed for him or be familiar
with him.  Be not reserved with him when he openeth speech, neither
answer him after a scornful manner.  Withdraw not thyself from him,
neither interrupt  him whose matter is not yet ended, whom it is
possible to benefit.

Let thy face be bright what time thou livest.  That which goeth
into the storehouse must come out therefrom; and bread is to be shared.
He that is grasping in entertainment shall himself have an empty belly;
he that causeth strife cometh himself to sorrow.  Take not such an one
for thy companion.  It is a man's kindly acts that are remembered of
him in the years after his life.

Know well thy merchants; for when thine affairs are in evil case,
thy good repute among thy friends is a channel  which is filled.  It
is more important than the dignities of a man; and {56} the wealth of
one passeth to another.  The good repute of a man's son is a glory unto
him; and a good character is for remembrance.

Correct chiefly; instruct conformably therewith.  Vice must be
drawn out, that virtue may remain.  Nor is this a matter of misfortune,
for one that is a gainsayer becometh a strife-maker.

If thou make a woman to be ashamed, wanton of heart, one known by
her townsfolk to be falsely placed, be kind unto her for a space, send
her not away, give her to eat.  The wantonness of her heart shall
esteem thy guidance.


If thou obey these things that I have said unto thee, all thy
demeanour shall be of the best; for, verily, the quality of truth is
among their excellences.  Set the memory of them in the mouths of the
people; for their proverbs are good.  Nor shall any word that hath here
been set down cease out of this land for ever, but shall be made a
pattern whereby princes shall speak well.  They (my words) shall
instruct a man; how he shall speak, after he hath heard them; yea, he
shall become as one skilful in obeying, excellent in speaking, after he
hath heard them.  Good fortune shall befall him, for he shall be of the
highest rank.  He shall be gracious to the end of his life; he shall be
{57} contented always.  His knowledge shall be his guide  into a
place of security, wherein he shall prosper while on earth.  The
scholar shall be content in his knowledge.  As to the prince, in
his turn, forsooth, his heart shall be happy, his tongue made straight.
And in these proverbs, his lips shall speak, his eyes shall see, and
his ears shall hear, that which is profitable for his son, so that he
deal justly, void of deceit.

A splendid thing is the obedience of an obedient son; he cometh in
and listeneth obediently.

Excellent in hearing, excellent in speaking, is every man that obeyeth
what is noble; and the obedience of an obeyer is a noble thing.

Obedience is better than all things that are; it maketh good-will.

How good it is that a son should take that from his father by which he
hath reached old age.

That which is desired by the God is obedience; disobedience is abhorred
of the God.

Verily, it is the heart that maketh its master to obey or to disobey;
for the safe and sound life of a man are his heart.

It is the obedient man that obeyeth what is said; he that loveth to
obey, the same shall carry out commands.


He that obeyeth becometh one obeyed.

It is good indeed when a son obeyeth his father; and he (his father)
that hath spoken hath great joy of it.  Such a son shall be mild as a
master, and he that heareth him shall obey him that hath spoken.  He
shall be comely in body and honoured by his father.  His memory shall
be in the mouths of the living, those upon earth, as long as they
exist.

Let a son receive the word of his father, not being heedless of
any rule of his.  Instruct thy son thus, for the obedient man is one
that is perfect in the opinion of princes.  If he direct his mouth by
what hath been enjoined him, watchful and obedient, thy son shall be
wise, and his goings seemly.  Heedlessness leadeth unto disobedience on
the morrow; but understanding shall stablish him.  As for the fool, he
shall be crushed.

As for the fool, devoid of obedience, he doeth nothing.  Knowledge
he regardeth as ignorance, profitable things as hurtful things.  He
doeth all kind of errors, so that he is rebuked therefor every day.  He
liveth in death therewith; it is his food.  At chattering speech
he marvelleth, as at the wisdom of princes, living in death every day.
He is shunned because of his misfortunes, by reason of the multitude of
afflictions that cometh upon him every day.

A son that hearkeneth is as a Follower of Horus.  He is good
after he hearkeneth; he groweth old, he reacheth honour and reverence.
He repeateth in like manner to his sons and daughters, so renewing the
instruction of his father.  Each man instructeth as did his begetter,
repeating it unto his children.  Let them speak with their
sons and daughters, that they may be famous in their deeds.  Let that
which thou speakest implant true things and just in the life of thy
children.  Then the highest authority shall arrive, and sins depart
from them.  And such men as see these things shall say, 'Surely that
man hath spoken to good purpose,' and they shall do likewise; or, 'But
surely that man was experienced.'  And all people shall declare, 'It is
they that shall direct the multitude; dignities are not complete
without them.'

Take not any word away, neither add one; set not one in the place
of another.  Beware of opening in thyself.

Be wary of speech when a learned man hearkeneth unto thee; desire to be
stablished for good in the mouth of those that hear thee speaking.  If
thou have entered as an expert, speak with exact  lips, that thy
conduct may be seemly.

Be thine heart overflowing; but refrain thy mouth.  Let thy
conduct be exact while amongst nobles, and seemly before thy lord,
doing that which he hath commanded.  Such a son shall speak unto them
that hearken to him; moreover, his begetter shall be favoured.  Apply
thine heart, what time thou speakest, to saying things such that the
nobles who listen declare, 'How excellent is that which cometh out of
his mouth!'

Carry out the behest of thy lord to thee.  How good is the
teaching of a man's father, for he hath come from him, who hath spoken
of his son while he was yet unborn; and that which is done for him (the
son) is more than that which is commanded him.  Forsooth, a good son is
of the gift of the God; he doeth more than is {61} enjoined on him, he
doeth right, and putteth his heart into all his goings.


If now thou attain my position, thy body shall flourish, the King
shall be content in all that thou doest, and thou shalt gather years of
life not fewer than I have passed upon earth.  I have gathered even
fivescore and ten years of life, for the King hath bestowed upon me
favours more than upon my forefathers; this because I wrought truth and
justice for the King unto mine old age.



 The cautious man flourisheth, the exact one is praised; the
innermost chamber openeth unto the man of silence.  Wide is the seat
of the man gentle of speech; but knives are prepared against one that
forceth a path, that he advance not, save in due season.

If thou sit with a company of people, desire not the bread that
thou likest: short is the time of restraining the heart, and gluttony
is an abomination; therein is the quality of a beast.  A cup of water
quencheth the thirst, and a mouthful of melon supporteth the heart.  A
good thing standeth for goodness, but some small thing standeth for
plenty.  A base man is he that is governed by his belly; he
departeth only when he is no longer able to fill full his belly in
men's houses.

If thou sit with a glutton, eat with him, then depart .

If thou drink with a drunkard, accept drink, and his heart shall be
satisfied.

Refuse not meat when with a greedy man.  Take that which he giveth
thee; set it not on one side, thinking that it will be a courteous
thing.

If a man be lacking in good fellowship, no speech hath any
influence over him.  He is sour of face toward the glad-hearted that
are kindly to him; he is a grief unto his mother and his friends; and
all men cry, 'Let thy name be known; thou art silent in thy mouth
when thou art addressed!'

Be not haughty because of thy might in the midst of thy young
soldiers.  Beware of making strife, for one knoweth not the things that
the God will do when He punisheth.

The Vizier caused his sons and daughters to be summoned, when he had
finished the rules of the conduct of men.  And they marvelled when they
came to him.  Then he said unto them, 'Hearken unto everything that is
in writing in this book, even as I have said it in adding unto
profitable sayings.'  And they cast themselves on their bellies, and
they read it, even as it was in writing.  And it was better in their
opinion than any thing in this land unto its limits.

Now they were living when His Majesty, the King of Upper and Lower
Egypt, HEUNI, {64} departed, and His Majesty, the King of Upper and
Lower Egypt, SENFÔRU, was enthroned as a gracious king over the whole
of this land.


Beginneth here the Instruction made by the Majesty of the King of Upper
and Lower Egypt SEHOTEP-'EB-RÊ', Son of the Sun AMENEMHÊ'ET, the
Justified.[1]  He speaketh thus in discovering words of truth unto his
Son, the Lord of the World:

1.  Shine forth, he saith, even as the God.  Hearken to that which I
say unto thee: that thou may reign over the land, that thou may govern
the world, that thou may excel in goodness.

2.  Let one withdraw himself from his subordinates entirely.  It
befalleth that mankind give their hearts unto one that causeth them
fear.   Mix not among them alone; fill not thine heart with a brother;
know not a trusted friend; make for thyself no familiar dependents; in
these things is no satisfaction.

3.  When thou liest down have care for thy very life,[2] since friends
exist not for a man in the {68} day of misfortunes.  I gave to the
beggar, and caused the orphan to live; I made him that had not to
attain, even as he that had.

4.  But it was the eater of my food that made insurrection against me;
to whom I gave mine hands, he created disturbance thereby; they that
arrayed them in my fine linen regarded me a shadow; and it was they
that anointed themselves with my spices that entered my harem.

5.  My images are among the living; and my achievements are among men.
But I have made an heroic story that hath not been heard; a great feat
of arms that hath not been seen.  Surely one fighteth for a lassoed ox
that forgetteth yesterday;[3] and good fortune is of no avail unto one
that cannot perceive it.

6.  It was after the evening meal, and night was come.  I took for
myself an hour of ease.  I lay down upon my bed, for I was weary.  My
heart began to wander .  I slept.  And lo! weapons were brandished,
and there was conference concerning me.  I acted as the serpent of the
desert.[4]

7.  I awoke to fight; I was alone.  I found one struck down, it was the
captain of the guard.  Had I received quickly the arms from his hand,
{69} I had driven back the dastards by smiting around.  But he was not
a brave man on that night, nor could I fight alone; an occasion of
prowess cometh not to one surprised.  Thus was I.

8.  Behold, then, vile things came to pass, for I was without thee; the
courtiers knew not that I had passed on to thee [my power], I sat not
with thee on the throne.[5]  Let me, then, make thy plans.  Because I
awed them not I was not unmindful of them; but mine heart bringeth not
to remembrance the slackness of servants.

9.  Is it the custom of women to gather together assailants? are
assassins reared within my palace? was the opening done by cutting
through the ground?  The underlings were deceived as to what they
did.[6]  But misfortunes have not come in my train since my birth; nor
hath there existed the equal of me as a doer of valiance.

10.  I forced my way up to Elephantinê, I went down unto the
coast-lakes;[7] I have stood upon the boundaries of the land, and I
have seen its centre.  I have set the limits of might by my might in my
deeds.

11.  I raised corn, I loved Nôpi[8]; the Nile begged of me every
valley.  In my reign none {70} hungered; none thirsted therein.  They
were contented in that which I did, saying concerning me, 'Every
commandment is meet.'

12.  I overcame lions; I carried off crocodiles.  I cast the Nubians
under my feet; I carried off the Southern Nubians; I caused the
Asiatics to flee, even as hounds.

13.  I have made me an house, adorned with gold, its ceiling with
_lapis lazuli_, its walls having deep foundations.  Its doors are of
copper, their bolts are of bronze.  It is made for ever-lasting;
eternity is in awe of it.  I know every dimension thereof, O Lord of
the World!

14.  There are divers devices in buildings.  I know the pronouncements
of men when inquiring into its beauties; but they know not that it was
without thee, O my son, Senwesert; life, safe and sound, be to thee--by
thy feet do I walk; thou art after mine own heart; by thine eyes do I
see; born in an hour of delight, with spirits[9] that rendered thee
praise.

15.  Behold, that which I have done at the beginning, let me set it in
order for thee at the end; let me be the landing-place of that which is
in thine heart.  All men together set the White Crown on the Offspring
of the God, fixing it unto its due place.  I shall begin thy praises
when in the Boat of Ra.  Thy kingdom hath been from primeval time; not
by my doing, {71} who have done valiant things.  Raise up monuments,
make beautiful thy tomb.  I have fought against him whom thou knowest;
for I desire not that he should be beside thy Majesty.  Life, safe and
sound, be to thee."